Blogpost for star-tree index (#3735)
opensearch-project/project-website: _posts/2025-04-10-Super-Fast-Aggregations-in-OpenSearch-with-Star-tree-index.md

---
layout: post
title:  "The power of star-tree indexes: Supercharging OpenSearch aggregations" 
authors:

>   - gbh

Reviewer: These are github aliases, right?

Please correct the aliases:

  -  bharath-techie
  - sandeshkr419
  - backslasht
  - kolchfa

Reviewer 2: @sandeshkr419 These are aliases to the author files https://github.com/opensearch-project/project-website/blob/main/_community_members/gbh.md

  - sandeshkr419
  - psithanandam
  - kolchfa
date: 2025-04-10
has_science_table: true
categories:
  - technical-posts

> meta_keywords: star tree,indexing,aggregations,materialized views,startree

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
meta_keywords:  star-tree index, OpenSearch aggregations, multi-field index, query performance, star-tree mapping, search optimization, query latency, performance tuning.
```

meta_description: Learn how star-tree index improves the performance of aggregations in OpenSearch.
---

Aggregations in OpenSearch play a critical role in enabling real-time data analysis and visualization. They are extensively used in OpenSearch Dashboards to create interactive charts and dashboards, providing insights into large volumes of data. But as your data grows, aggregation performance can suffer. That's where the new **star-tree index** comes in.

Star-tree index is an experimental feature introduced in OpenSearch 2.18 that precomputes aggregations during indexing. By doing so, it significantly reduces query latency, especially for large datasets and complex aggregations. Whether you're running dashboards on log data or computing metrics over millions of records, star-tree index helps you run queries faster and more predictably, without the need to change your queries.

In this blog post, you'll learn what a star-tree index is, how it works, and how you can use it to accelerate your aggregations.

## Aggregations in OpenSearch

OpenSearch provides several types of aggregations, such as the following:

> - **Metric aggregations**: Compute metrics such as sum, min, max, or average, on numeric fields.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Metric aggregations**: Compute metrics, such as sum, min, max, or average, on numeric fields.
```

- **Bucket aggregations**: Group query results based on defined criteria, for example, by time intervals using date histograms.

However, compared to standard queries, aggregations can introduce performance challenges:

- **Scalability**: Query latency increases with the number of matching documents.
- **Resource consumption**: Aggregations require more CPU, memory, and disk usage.

> For example, consider a task where you want to analyze application logs by computing a metric aggregation, such as the average or sum—grouped by HTTP status code.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, suppose that you want to analyze application logs by computing a metric aggregation, such as the average or sum, grouped by HTTP status code.
```

> The following table compares the query latency when aggregating on a high-frequency status code and a low-frequency one.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following table compares query latency when aggregating on both a high-frequency and low-frequency status code.
```

| Query | Number of documents | Latency, milliseconds |
|-------|----------------------|---------|

> | Metric aggregation for status = `200` | 200,000,000 | 4200  |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| Metric aggregation for status = `200` | 200,000,000 | 4,200  |
```

| Metric aggregation for status = `400` | 3,000 | 5 |

In this case, status code `200` (OK) appears very frequently in the logs, while status code `400` (Bad Request) is relatively rare. Aggregations on high-frequency values like `200` require scanning a much larger number of documents, leading to significantly higher latency. In contrast, aggregations on low-frequency values like `400` involve fewer documents and complete much faster.

> Star-tree index is designed to reduce this latency, even at scale.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The star-tree index feature is designed to reduce this latency, even at scale.
```

> ## What is star-tree index?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## What is a star-tree index?
```

> Star-tree index, inspired by Apache Pinot, is OpenSearch's first multi-field index designed to accelerate aggregations. During indexing, a star-tree index precomputes aggregations for the configured metrics across all combinations of the defined dimensions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The star-tree index feature, inspired by Apache Pinot, is OpenSearch's first multi-field index designed to accelerate aggregations. During indexing, a star-tree index precomputes aggregations for the configured metrics across all combinations of the defined dimensions.
```

The following image illustrates the high-level architecture of a star-tree index.

![High Level Architecture](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-04-10-Super-Fast-Aggregations-in-OpenSearch-with-Star-tree-index/star-tree-structure.png)

The tree is structured hierarchically based on dimension values, such as `status` and `Day`. Each path from the root node to a leaf represents a unique combination of dimension values. Leaf nodes contain aggregated metrics, such as `Avg(size)` and `Count(reqs)`, for the documents that match that dimension combination. **Star nodes (`*`)** are used to represent aggregated values across all values of a particular dimension, allowing queries to skip unnecessary branches. **Child nodes** are only created if the number of documents exceeds a configurable threshold (`maxLeafDocs`).

The example in the image shows how queries traverse the tree: a query for average size where `status = 200` and `Day = 11` follows a specific path (depicted by blue arrows), while a query for average size on `Day = 12` (regardless of status) uses a star node to skip the `status` dimension entirely.

> Internally, star-tree index consists of the following components:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Internally, a star-tree index consists of the following components:
```

- A **star tree** that organizes unique dimension values into tree nodes for efficient traversal.
- **Columnar doc values** that store preaggregated results for the configured dimensions.

For additional technical details, see [Star-tree index structure](https://docs.opensearch.org/docs/latest/search-plugins/star-tree-index/#star-tree-index-structure).

> ## Benefits of using star-tree index

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Benefits of using a star-tree index
```

> Star-tree index offers the following advantages that make it well-suited for high-performance analytics at scale.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The star-tree index feature offers the following advantages that make it well suited for high-performance analytics at scale.
```

### Predictable latency

> Traditionally, aggregation query latency in OpenSearch increases with the number of matching documents. Star-tree index provides faster and more predictable query latency by precomputing aggregation results, as shown in the following table.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Traditionally, aggregation query latency in OpenSearch increases with the number of matching documents. A star-tree index provides faster and more predictable query latency by precomputing aggregation results, as shown in the following table.
```

| Query | Number of documents | Plain query latency | Star-tree query latency |
|-------|----------------------|---------------------|--------------------------|

> | Avg(duration) for status = 200 | 200 million | 4.2 seconds | 6.3 milliseconds |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| Avg (duration) for status = 200 | 200 million | 4.2 seconds | 6.3 milliseconds |
```

> | Avg(duration) for status = 400 | 3,000 | 5 milliseconds | 6.5 milliseconds |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| Avg (duration) for status = 400 | 3,000 | 5 milliseconds | 6.5 milliseconds |
```

> ### Multi-aggregations support

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Multi-aggregation support
```

> Traditionally, when running queries that involve multiple aggregations on different fields, each field for each aggregation is processed separately, increasing latency. In contrast, star-tree index offers native multi-field support, making it significantly more efficient in these scenarios. Star-tree index preprocesses queries that span multiple aggregations, eliminating the need for repeated star-tree traversals and thereby improving overall performance.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Traditionally, when running queries that involve multiple aggregations on different fields, each field for each aggregation is processed separately, increasing latency. In contrast, a star-tree index offers native multi-field support, making it significantly more efficient in these scenarios. A star-tree index preprocesses queries that span multiple aggregations, eliminating the need for repeated star-tree traversals and thereby improving overall performance.
```

### Improved throughput for complex aggregations

> For resource-intensive operations like date histograms with sub-aggregations on large datasets, star-tree index significantly reduces latency and increases throughput, as shown in the following table.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For resource-intensive operations like date histograms with sub-aggregations on large datasets, a star-tree index can significantly reduce latency and increase throughput, as shown in the following table.
```

| Query | Number of documents | Traditional query latency | Star-tree query latency (N = 10,000) | Traditional query throughput | Star-tree query throughput |
|-------|----------------------|------------------|-------------------------------|--------------------|----------------------|
| Yearly date histogram on sum of tip amount (passenger count = 1) | 120 million | 13 seconds | 94 milliseconds | 0.08 | 2.01 |
| Yearly date histogram (passenger count = 1–2) | 140 million | 15 seconds | 114 milliseconds | 0.07 | 2.01 |
| Yearly date histogram (passenger count = 1–5) | 160 million | 17 seconds | 160 milliseconds | 0.06 | 2.01 |

### Configurability

> Star-tree index includes various [configuration options](https://docs.opensearch.org/docs/latest/field-types/supported-field-types/star-tree/#star-tree-index-configuration-options) to balance storage overhead and query performance. For example, the `max_leaf_docs` parameter controls how many documents are included in each star-tree leaf. A higher `max_leaf_docs` value leads to better storage efficency but increases query latency. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A star-tree index includes various [configuration options](https://docs.opensearch.org/docs/latest/field-types/supported-field-types/star-tree/#star-tree-index-configuration-options) that balance storage overhead and query performance. For example, the `max_leaf_docs` parameter controls how many documents are included in each star-tree leaf. A higher `max_leaf_docs` value leads to better storage efficiency but increases query latency. 
```

The following table demonstrates the performance difference between traditional queries and star-tree queries with different `max_leaf_docs` values (N).

| Query | Number of documents | Traditional query latency | Star-tree query latency (N = 100) | Star-tree latency (N = 10,000) |
|-------|----------------------|------------------|-------------------------------|--------------------------------|
| Metric aggregation for status = `200` | 200 million | 4.2 seconds | 2.5 milliseconds | 6.3 milliseconds |
| Metric aggregation for status = `400` | 3,000 | 5 milliseconds | 2.7 milliseconds | 8.5 milliseconds |

### Real-time compatibility

> While features such as index rollups or transforms offer preaggregated views, they do not operate on real-time data and can degrade indexing performance. In contrast, star-tree index operates in real time with minimal indexing overhead. Queries require no changes---the engine automatically detects and routes eligible queries to the star-tree index.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While features such as index rollups or transforms offer preaggregated views, they do not operate on real-time data and can degrade indexing performance. In contrast, a star-tree index operates in real time with minimal indexing overhead. Queries require no changes---the engine automatically detects and routes eligible queries to the star-tree index.
```

## Limitations

> While star-tree index offers substantial performance benefits, it currently has the following limitations:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While the star-tree index feature offers substantial performance benefits, it currently has the following limitations:
```

> - Star-tree index is currently suitable only for immutable datasets. Changes to documents (updates or deletions) are not reflected in the star-tree index.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- A star-tree index is currently suitable only for immutable datasets. Changes to documents (updates or deletions) are not reflected in the star-tree index.
```

- A star-tree index is created during refresh/flush/merge operations, which can impact write throughput. Benchmark data will be published soon.
- Once a star tree has been created for an index, it cannot be removed from that index. If you need to disable star-tree functionality, you must reindex all data into a new index without the star-tree mapping configuration. However, you can search the index using traditional rather than star-tree search by setting `indices.composite_index.star_tree.enabled` to `false`.

For more information, see [Limitations](https://docs.opensearch.org/docs/latest/search-plugins/star-tree-index/#limitations).

> ## How to use star-tree index

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## How to use a star-tree index
```

To use a star-tree index, define a [star-tree mapping](https://docs.opensearch.org/docs/latest/field-types/supported-field-types/star-tree/#star-tree-index-mappings) during index creation. The mapping must reflect the dimensions and metrics for the aggregations you want to optimize.

When using your star-tree index, note the following details:

> - No changes are required to query syntax or parameters.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- No changes are required to the query syntax or parameters.
```

- As of OpenSearch 2.19, only certain [aggregation types](https://docs.opensearch.org/docs/latest/search-plugins/star-tree-index/#supported-queries-and-aggregations) are supported.
- OpenSearch automatically identifies and optimizes eligible queries using a star-tree index in real time.
- Once configured during index creation, a star-tree index requires no additional maintenance or modifications. 

## Conclusion

> Star-tree index significantly improves aggregation performance in OpenSearch. It delivers consistent, low-latency results, even at scale, and requires no query-side changes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The star-tree index feature significantly improves aggregation performance in OpenSearch. It delivers consistent, low-latency results, even at scale, and requires no query-side changes.
```

> In the future, we're planning to support additional aggregation and query types, including Boolean query, date range query, nested aggregations, and terms aggregations. As adoption grows, star-tree index is poised to become a key component of real-time analytics in OpenSearch. To track this feature's progress, see [this issue](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/15257).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the future, we're planning to support additional aggregation and query types, including Boolean queries, date range queries, nested aggregations, and terms aggregations. As adoption grows, the star-tree index feature is poised to become a key component of real-time analytics in OpenSearch. To track this feature's progress, see [this issue](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/15257).
```
